INTRODUCTION TO JAVA

Java is one of the most popular programming languages used to build applications such as mobile apps, enterprise software, cloud applications, and distributed systems.

FEATURES OF JAVA

1.1 Simple
Java has a clean and understandable syntax similar to C++, but without complex features such as pointers. It includes automatic garbage collection.

1.2 Object Oriented
Java is based on the concepts of classes and objects. It supports inheritance, encapsulation, polymorphism, and abstraction.

1.3 Platform Independent
Java follows the Write Once, Run Anywhere principle. Java code is compiled to bytecode which runs on the JVM.
Source code → Bytecode → JVM execution

1.4 Secure
Java does not allow direct pointer manipulation and verifies bytecode for safety. It also uses secure class loading mechanisms.

1.5 Robust
Java provides strong memory management, exception handling, and type checking which makes applications stable.

1.6 Multithreaded
Java supports multithreading using the Thread class, Runnable interface, and the Executor framework.

1.7 Portable
Java applications can run on different platforms without modification because bytecode and JVM are platform independent.

1.8 High Performance
The Just In Time (JIT) compiler improves performance, though Java is still slower than languages like C++ that compile directly to machine code.

1.9 Distributed
Java provides APIs for networking and distributed computing such as RMI and web services.

JAVA PLATFORM COMPONENTS

2.1 JDK (Java Development Kit)
JDK contains the compiler, Java libraries, debugger, and JRE. Developers use JDK to write and compile Java code.

2.2 JRE (Java Runtime Environment)
JRE contains the JVM and core libraries. It is used to run Java programs.

2.3 JVM (Java Virtual Machine)
JVM executes the bytecode. It handles class loading, memory management, and garbage collection. JVM is platform dependent but bytecode is platform independent.

HOW JAVA PROGRAMS RUN

Step 1: Write program in Program.java
Step 2: Compile using javac Program.java which generates Program.class (bytecode)
Step 3: Run using java Program

BASIC STRUCTURE OF A JAVA PROGRAM

Example:
class Hello {
public static void main(String[] args) {
System.out.println("Hello, Java!");
}
}

class keyword defines a class.
main method is the entry point.
System.out.println() prints text to console.

JAVA EDITIONS

Java SE: Standard Edition for desktop and general-purpose programming.
Java EE: Enterprise Edition for web and enterprise applications such as servlets and web services.
Java ME: Micro Edition for embedded systems and small devices.
JavaFX: Used for GUI applications.

APPLICATIONS OF JAVA

Java is used for:
Android applications
Banking and finance applications
Enterprise backend systems
Cloud computing platforms
Big Data technologies such as Hadoop
E-commerce systems
Scientific and gaming applications

ADVANTAGES OF JAVA

Platform independent
Highly secure and stable
Strong community support
Large number of libraries and frameworks
Powerful IDE support
Cross-platform GUI support

LIMITATIONS OF JAVA

Slower than native languages
Consumes more memory
Verbosity in syntax
GUI tools are less modern compared to others

DIFFERENCE BETWEEN JAVA AND C++

Java uses automatic garbage collection, while C++ requires manual memory management.
Java does not support pointer usage or operator overloading.
Java does not support multiple inheritance with classes; C++ does.
Java is platform independent using JVM, while C++ generates platform dependent machine code.

SUMMARY

Java is a secure, robust, and platform independent object oriented language widely used for enterprise and mobile applications. It runs on the JVM and offers strong community support and library availability, making it one of the leading programming languages today.